---
layout: post
title: "Tips for using Oracle Business Intelligence Enterprise Edition: Part 2"
date: 2018-08-30 00:00
comments: true
author: Vignesh Kumar
published: true
authorIsRacker: true
categories:
    - General
---

Originally published by Tricore: ????

In part 1 of this two-part series, we discussed some tips for resolving common
issues with Oracle&reg; Business Intelligence Enterprise Edition (OBIEE). In
part two, we share two additional OBIEE tips.

<!-- more -->

### Introduction

These tips come from our first-hand experiences with our own projects and with
troubleshooting customer queries. If you're a middleware administrator, you
can leverage these tips in your routine work to boost efficiency.

### Tip 1: OBIEE analytics logo customization

Every administrator is required to do OBIEE logo customization based on the requirement. I have included some tips for customizing the logo in OBIEE Analytics. Below are the steps that needs to be performed:

Steps to customize the logo in OBIEE 11g:

After the completion of the OBIEE installation you can see the Oracle logo on the OBIEE Analytics page as well as Login page as shown in the screenshots below:

Here we are going to customize this logo as per our requirement.
Step1: Login to the environment where OBIEE is installed.
Step2: Follow the path given below to change the logo for Home page:

   `$FMW_HOME/user_projects/domains/DR_domain/servers/bi_server1/tmp/_WL_user/analytics_11.1.1/7dezjl/war/res/s_Skyros/master`

3: Here we can see **oracle_logo.png**.
4: Rename your existing customized png image to **oracle_logo**.
5: Replace with the existing image in the above mentioned path.
**Note**: Default Dimension is 119*25 for (OBIEE 11.1.1.7), 104*14 for (OBIEE 11.1.1.9) preferable for the image.
**Note**: Only OBIEE version 11.1.1.9  allows us to change the entire screen (Login page, home, dashboards, logout page)in a go, when the oracle_logo gets changed.
6: Restart OPMN services.
7: Clear the browser Cache and check for the required changes.

After OPMN services are restarted you'll be able to see your customized image on the login and home page of analytics, as shown in the following images.

After the above process is complete you will be able to see customized image in OBIEE.  The above tip clarifies the confusion during customization of the logo in OBIEE. The path mentioned above is of the Oracle logo based on the Skin style which helps the users to customize in a short period of time. The main advantage of this level of customization is that the user feels that the product is “their” tool.




### Tip 2: Customizing Banner Text in OBIEE Analytics

In tip two, you will learn how to customize your banner text in OBIEE Analytics. The steps to change the Banner Text in OBIEE Analytics are as follows:

After completion of OBIEE installation you can see the Oracle logo in OBIEE Analytics page as depicted in screenshot below:



1. Login to the machine where OBIEE is installed.
2. Navigate to the following path:

  **/FMW_HOME/Oracle_BI1/bifoundation/web/msgdb/l_en/messages**
3. Search for the XML file named **productmessages.xml**.
4. Take a backup of this XML file before editing.
5. Edit the **productmessages.xml** file.
6. Scroll to the line that has the code `<WebMessage name="kmsgHeaderBIBrandName"><TEXT>Business Intelligence</TEXT></WebMessage>` and change the text as per your requirement.
7. Under the `<Text>` parameter, change the **Business Intelligence** to **TriCore Solutions BI Dashboards**.
8. Save the file.
9. Restart all of the OBIEE services.
10. Clear the browser cache and check for the required changes. "TriCore
    Solutions BI Dashboards” will get reflected to all the pages.
    After you've restarted OPMN services you'll be able to see your customized
    text on the login and home pages of analytics, as shown in the following
    images:

### Conclusion

After you've completed this process you'll be able to see your customized text
in OBIEE. We hope these tips help you better understand the UI elements in
OBIEE 11g and reduce the amount of time it takes you to customize your
environment.
