---
layout: post
title: "MongoDB Tips: Part 2"
date: 2018-06-18 00:00
comments: true
author: Pavan Paramathmuni
published: true
authorIsRacker: true
categories:
    - General
---

Originally published by Tricore: Aug 24, 2017

SUMMARY GOES HERE

Welcome to Part Two of the MongoDB Tips blog. I have divided these tips
across many sections of topics in MongoDB. They include Optimization,
Performance, Speed, Indexing, Schema Design, and Data Safety. Happy
Reading.

**Tip 1 \#\
\
Learn to Use --notablescan Option in Development however NOT in
PRODUCTION.**

![D:\\Tricore\\MongoDB
blog\\MongoDB-Full-table-scans.jpg](media/image1.jpeg){width="3.1458333333333335in"
height="2.3593755468066493in"}

**Source: [www.percona.com](http://www.percona.com)**

MongoDB has an option \--notablescan, this returns an error when a query
has to do a full table scan. This can be handy in development if you
want to make sure that all of your queries are hitting indexes, however,
do not use it in a production environment as it might cause performance
issues. The problem is that many simple admin tasks require table scans.
This option allows to see the list of collections in your database that
takes a full table scan.

**Tip 2 \# Manage All the Servers & Databases from a Single SHELL**

By default, Mongo connects to localhost: 27017. You can connect to any
server on startup by running mongo host: port/database. You can also
connect to multiple servers or databases within the shell.

For example, suppose we have an application that has two databases: one
dealer's database and one distributor's database.\
If you were working with both, you could keep switching between the two
with use dealers, use distributors, and use dealers again, and so on.

**Tip 3 \# Know JavaScript **

When you are using a language with its own excellent shell, you should
be familiar with the JavaScript. It is the quickest, best way of
accessing information and a common language among all the MongoDB users.

To get everything possible out of the shell, it helps if you have
knowledge of JavaScript as it has some best useful features, which makes
it a very flexible and a powerful language.

**Tip 4 \# Take Instant-In-Time Backups of Servers**

To take a backup of a database with journaling enabled, you can either
take a file system snapshot or do a normal fsync+lock and then a dump.
Note that you can't just copy all of the files without fsync and
locking, as copying is not an instantaneous operation. If the copy of
the Journal files and backups reside on different volumes, then at later
point in time the backups might be useless.

**Tip 5 \# Try to Fetch Data from a Single Query\
**

Application unit is used as a general term for some application work.
MongoDB schemas should be designed to do query per application unit.

If you have a web or a mobile application, you can think of an
application unit as a request to the backend.\
Some other examples:

• For a desktop application, this might be a user/client interaction.

• For an analytics system, this might be a Dashboard load.

It is basically a discrete unit of work that your application does that
may involve accessing the database.

**Conclusion:**

MongoDB is a fast, robust and highly scalable database. It works on many
platforms and has many language drivers for its optimal usage. One of
the biggest advantages of a document database is scalability through the
use of embedding data. MongoDB is growing day by day and one should have
clear understanding of its basics as well as tips for better usage. I
hope you have learned few more tips and concepts around MongoDB. Looking
forward to any queries that you may have on the topic. You can also
leave a comment in the field below:
