---
layout: post
title: "Oracle Virtual Directory: A view of LDAP solutions"
date: 2018-08-15 00:00
comments: true
author: Amit Raghuvanshi
published: true
authorIsRacker: true
categories:
    - General
---

Originally published by TriCore: May 11, 2017

There are many Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP) solutions
available for organizational single Sign-on (SSO) and user management,
including Oracle&reg; Internet Directory (OID), Microsoft&reg; Active Directory
(AD), and many other systems. When you have multiple implementations, it can
be difficult to manage and use them all. In this blog post, you'll learn how
to create a view that you can use to manage all of your enterprise's LDAP
implementations.

<!-- more -->


### Introduction

In this blog post, we share a cost effective way that you can access and
manage all of your existing LDAP solutions through a view-like object. The
following image illustrates how to use Oracle Virtual Directory (OVD) to
create a view of all of the LDAP applications that an organization uses.

![A diagram showing how OVD fits into enterprise
architecture]({% asset_path 2018-08-15-ovd/picture1.png %})

Image Source: [Oracle Fusion Middleware Administrator's Guide for Oracle
Virtual Directory, 11g Release 1
(11.1.1)](https://docs.oracle.com/cd/E25178_01/oid.1111/e10046/und_ovd.htm)

OVD simplifies management of multiple LDAP systems by creating a single
virtual view for accessing all enterprise sources. The main advantage of using
OVD is that it doesn’t require any changes to an existing structure on a
source. It also supports a diverse set of clients such as web applications and
portals. In addition, OVD can connect to directories, databases, and web
services, as shown in the following image.

![A diagram illustrating how OVD connects to many data
sources]({% asset_path 2018-08-15-ovd/picture2.png %})

Image Source: [Oracle Fusion Middleware Administrator's Guide for Oracle
Virtual Directory, 11g Release 1
(11.1.1)](https://docs.oracle.com/cd/E25178_01/oid.1111/e10046/und_ovd.htm)

OVD provides Internet and industry-standard LDAP and XML views of existing
enterprise identity information. It generates these views without
synchronizing or moving data from its native locations. This capability
accelerates application deployment and reduces costs by eliminating the need
to continually adapt those applications to a changing identity landscape as
user populations are added, changed, or removed.

OVD is a virtual directory that provides a view of several OIDs or ADs. All of
the data used through OVD is transparent to users. It appears as though the
data is coming from a single OID, which simplifies the management of multiple
OIDs and ADs in programs or other software such as OAM.

OVD generates views by creating Adapters and using them to access the
underlying information from various original locations. OVD needs the
following information to create an Adapter:

- The target Distinguished Name (DN), which must be kept in OVD
- The source host name
- The source OID or AD port
- The Source DN, which must be mapped to the target DN

**Note**: You can define as many Adapters as you want and connect them to
multiple OIDs and ADs simultaneously.

The following image provides an example of a Common Name (CN) definition for
the different organization units (OUs) that originate from different
LDAP sources.

![A flowchart showing how OVD's view behavior is
achieved]({% asset_path 2018-08-15-ovd/picture3.png %})

### Define an Adapter

To define an Adapter, use the following steps:

1. Launch the Oracle Directory Services Manager (ODSM) console by navigating
   to  `http://<Hostname>:7005/odsm` in your browser.
2. Connect to OVD on `<Hostname>:8899`. (The Default Port for OVD is `8899`.)
3. Select the **Adapter** tab.
4. Press the **New Adapter** button and proceed ().
5. Create a new Adapter named **OIDUsers**. For **Adapter Type**, select
   **LDAP**. Leave the default values in the other fields.
6. Provide the connection details for the source LDAP (in our case OID), such
   as the host, port, user name (server proxy Bind DN), and the password for
   accessing the source. In the following example, `127.0.0.1` is provided
   because both OID and OVD reside on the same host.
7. On the next screen, test the connection.
8. Provide the source OU (Remote Base) and the counterpart of the same for
   OVD, by which the OU will be used when you use this OVD. Leave the default
   values in the other fields.
9. Review all of the details on the summary page and click **Finish**.

![Screenshot of the New LDAP Adapter Summary
page]({% asset_path 2018-08-15-ovd/picture4.png %})

When you use the Adapter `ou=OIDUsers,dc=***,dc=ovd`, it automatically makes a
call to `cn=Users, dc=***,dc=oid` from the screen shown in the following image.

![A screenshot of the Connection Details for the
Adapter]({% asset_path 2018-08-15-ovd/picture5.png %})

We can define these Adapters for different versions of OIDs and ADs in a
similar way. This capability enables us to use the OVD as a single source of
data for different web services. As a result, OVD gives us a "virtual view"
without our having to program differently for each source of underlying data.

### Conclusion

OVD can help you use all of your existing LDAP solutions in a cost effective
way. It creates a view-like structure that doesn't require any changes to the
existing layout of technologies that your organization uses. It easily connects
to diverse applications and databases.

Have you used OVD? If so, let us know about your experience by posting a
comment below.
